# SSL Certificates

SSL certificates are required in order to run web sites using the HTTPS protocol. SSL certificates use a chain of trust, where each certificate is signed (trusted) by a higher, more credible certificate. At the top of the chain of trust are the root certificates, owned by Verisign and others. These certificates are typically shipped with your operating system or web browser.

Normal web traffic is sent unencrypted over the Internet. That is, anyone with access to the right tools can snoop all of that traffic. Obviously, this can lead to problems, especially where security and privacy is necessary, such as in credit card data and bank transactions. The Secure Socket Layer is used to encrypt the data stream between the web server and the web client (the browser).

SSL makes use of what is known as asymmetric cryptography, commonly referred to as public key cryptography (PKI). With public key cryptography, two keys are created, one public, one private. Anything encrypted with either key can only be decrypted with its corresponding key. Thus if a message or data stream were encrypted with the server's private key, it can be decrypted only using its corresponding public key, ensuring that the data only could have come from the server.

SSL Certificates serve a crucial role in the communication process. The certificate, signed by a trusted Certificate Authority (CA), ensures that the certificate holder is really who he claims to be. Without a trusted signed certificate, your data may be encrypted, however, the party you are communicating with may not be whom you think. Without certificates, impersonation attacks would be much more common.

When you visit a web site over HTTPS, your web browser will receive the ssl certificate for the web site. It will examine the contents of the certificate to see that is indeed valid for the domain name you are trying to visit. After that, it will verify the chain of trust. It will look at who has signed the certificate. If that certificate is a root-certificate, it will compare it against the ones shipped with the operating system. If it is a non-root certificate, it will follow the chain of trust up one more level.

When using a self-signed certificate, there is no chain of trust. The certificate has signed itself. The web browser will then issue a warning, telling you that the web site certificate cannot be verified. Therefore, you should not use self-signed certificates for professional use, but they can be used to set up temporary ssl servers. You can use them for test and development servers where security is not a big concern.