# SQL - DDL & DML

* DDL - Data Definition Language
* DML - Data Manipulation Language

## DDL

DDL is used to define data structures in an SQL database

DDL statements use the following keywords

* USE
* CREATE
* ALTER
* DROP
* TRUNCATE
* DELETE

These statements can be used to modify tables, but can also be used to modify Views and Users.

### Best Practices

SQL is case insensitive, but you probably shouldn't mix.

Write keywords in UPPER CASE. 

SQL is whitespace insensitive, so use as much as you need to make things look clean and understandable.

Use a semi-colon `;` at the end of your statements.

Inline comments are made with a double hypen (e.g. `-- this is a comment`)

Multi-line comments use Javascript or CSS syntax 

    /*
        Multi-line 
        comment
    */


### Transactional Processing

If anything in the statement fails, nothing gets processed.

### Create Command

Creates new Tables or Users

    CREATE TABLE Employees (
        EmployeeID INTEGER PRIMARY KEY, 
        firstName varchar(255), 
        lastName varchar(255)
    );

### USE Command

Makes sure you're using the right DB.

    USE database_name

### Alter Command

Alter existing DB objects

### Drop

    DROP TABLE Employees

You are not allowed to use the DROP command if other tables or fields rely on it via referential integrity.

### Truncate

Truncate will delete all the data (rows) in a table, but leave the structure (columns and data types) intact. 

### Merge or Union

`MERGE` or `UNION` compares the contents of one Data Table against another, and then inserts, updates, or deletes records based off of the differences between those two Tables. 

### Establishing Relationships

**One to One**: the PK from Table1 matches exactly to the PK from Table2

**One to Many**: this is the most common type of relationship. You will need an FK in Table1 that matches the PK in Table2

**Many to Many**: Always break it up into two One-to-Many relationships.

### Transactions

A transaction is a group of operations that are handled as one unit of work. In practice, this means that you may have many operations and if any of these operations fails the entire group of operations is treated as failed and the database is restored to its state before the group of operations was started. 

### Triggers

We can use triggers to automatically trigger a command if something happens (e.g. a new row was added).

We can also use triggers to prevent changes to rows that should not be changed for some reason.

### Views

In SQL you can save a query as a view and you can use that view as if it were a table.

If you're going to use a query a LOT, you can save it as a View.

    CREATE VIEW someNamedView AS SELECT --rest of your select statement here
    SELECT * FROM someNamedView

So essentially a View is a named query.



